Improve Commands, Keybindings and Menu docu (#193)
eclipse-theia/theia-website: src/docs/commands_keybindings.md

---
title: Commands/Menus/Keybindings
---

# Commands, Menus and Keybindings

> Commands are runnable actions defined by an ID, a name and the function to be executed. Commands can be triggered via the quick access bar, they can be bound to keybindings or menu items and they can be called programmatically. Commands can be context sensitive, so that they can only be called under certain conditions (window focus, current selection etc.).

Reviewer: > Commands are runnable actions defined by an ID, a name and the function to be executed.

This is not entirely true given a command's definition:

```ts
export interface Command {
    /**
     * A unique identifier of this command.
     */
    id: string;
    /**
     * A label of this command.
     */
    label?: string;
    originalLabel?: string;
    /**
     * An icon class of this command.
     */
    iconClass?: string;
    /**
     * A category of this command.
     */
    category?: string;
    originalCategory?: string;
}
```

If we are to mention the `name` (label) we should mention it is **optional**.

Author: correct, i adapted the text

> Commands are runnable actions defined by an ID, a name and the function to be executed. Commands can be triggered via the quick access bar, they can be bound to keybindings or menu items and they can be called programmatically. Commands can be context sensitive, so that they can only be called under certain conditions (window focus, current selection etc.).

Reviewer: > Commands can be context sensitive

Elaborate on how? Commands can be controlled primarily during registration with `isVisible` and `isEnabled`. We can also mention `isToggled` to be thorough.

Author: good catch, I added this with the last commit

> The following sections provide details about how to contribute commands, keybindings and menu items, how to connect them and how to use the corresponding services for managing these items.

Reviewer: I believe it is a run-on sentence. 

```suggestion
The following sections provide details about how to contribute commands, keybindings and menu items. The sections will describe how to connect the different contributions and how to use the corresponding services for managing these items.
```

If you are not yet familiar with contribution points in Theia or the use of dependency injection, please consider this guide on [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

All the following code examples are from the [Theia extension generator](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/generator-theia-extension). You can get the same code set-up by installing the generator, selecting the “Hello World” example (see here) and choosing “helloworld” as the name. 

## Contributing commands

> By contributing a command, you can add a custom action to Theia. A command can be triggered by the user via the quick access bar, a key binding or a menu entry. It can also be called programmatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By contributing a command, you can add a custom action to Theia. A command can be triggered by the user via the quick access bar, a keybinding or a menu entry. It can also be called programmatically.
```

All commands of a Theia application are managed in the `CommandRegistry`. To contribute commands to the command registry, modules must implement the `CommandContribution` interface (see code example below). 

A command is an object with an `id` and an optional, potentially user visible `label` (see HelloworldCommand in the example below). The command contribution receives the `CommandRegistry` in the `registerCommands` function as a parameter. The command can then be registered by calling `registerCommand` on this registry. Along with the command  a callback needs to be provided which is executed whenever the command is triggered. In the example, the command uses the MessageService to “say hello”. 

**helloworld-contribution.ts**
```typescript

> export const HelloworldCommand = {

Reviewer: We should give users `typings` here, if not done by the generator already we should add it:

```suggestion
export const HelloworldCommand: Command = {
```

   id: 'Helloworld.command',
   label: "Say Hello"
};
 
@injectable()
export class HelloworldCommandContribution implements CommandContribution {
 
   constructor(
       @inject(MessageService) private readonly messageService: MessageService,
   ) { }
 
   registerCommands(registry: CommandRegistry): void {
       registry.registerCommand(HelloworldCommand, {
           execute: () => this.messageService.info('Hello World!')
       });
   }
}

```

### Binding the contribution to CommandContribution

To make our `CommandContribution` accessible to Theia, we need to bind the custom `HelloworldCommandContribution` to the respective contribution symbol `CommandContribution`. This is done in the `helloworld-frontend-module`, for more details see [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

**helloworld-frontend-module.ts**
```typescript
export default new ContainerModule(bind => {
   // add your contribution bindings here
   bind(CommandContribution).to(HelloworldCommandContribution);
...
});
```

> The `CommandRegistry` used to register our contributed command above,also provides an API to interact with commands. As an example, you can programmatically execute commands, you can browse through all registered commands or you can access a list of recently executed commands. Please refer to the [TypeDoc for the CommandRegistry](https://eclipse-theia.github.io/theia/docs/next/classes/core.commandregistry-1.html) for more details. To use the `CommandRegistry` outside of a contribution, you can access it via dependency injection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CommandRegistry` used to register our contributed command above, also provides an API to interact with commands. As an example, you can programmatically execute commands, you can browse through all registered commands or you can access a list of recently executed commands. Please refer to the [TypeDoc for the CommandRegistry](https://eclipse-theia.github.io/theia/docs/next/classes/core.commandregistry-1.html) for more details. To use the `CommandRegistry` outside of a contribution, you can access it via dependency injection.
```

> In the following sections, we describe how to bind commands to menu items and key bindings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following sections, we describe how to bind commands to menu items and keybindings.
```

The `MenuAction` consists of a command id, specifying which command to trigger, and an optional label, specifying the label of the menu item.

**helloworld-contribution.ts**
```typescript
@injectable()
export class HelloworldMenuContribution implements MenuContribution {
 
   registerMenus(menus: MenuModelRegistry): void {
       menus.registerMenuAction(CommonMenus.EDIT_FIND, {
           commandId: HelloworldCommand.id,
           label: HelloworldCommand.label
       });
   }
}
```

To make our `MenuContribution` accessible to Theia, we need to bind the custom `HelloWorldMenuContribution` to the respective contribution symbol `MenuContribution`. This is done in the `helloworld-frontend-module`, for more details see [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

**helloworld-contribution.ts**
```typescript
export default new ContainerModule(bind => {
   bind(MenuContribution).to(HelloworldMenuContribution);
      ...
});

```

## Contributing Keybindings

> Keybindings allow the user to trigger commands using specific key combinations. Keybindings can define conditions, specifying when they are active. As an example, there can be key bindings that are only active when the text editor is focused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keybindings allow the user to trigger commands using specific key combinations. Keybindings can define conditions, specifying when they are active. As an example, there can be keybindings that are only active when the text editor is focused.
```

---
title: Commands/Menus/Keybindings
---

# Commands, Menus and Keybindings

> Commands are runnable actions defined by an ID and the function to be executed (plus some optional parameters like a name or an icon). Commands can be triggered via the quick access bar, they can be bound to keybindings or menu items and they can be called programmatically. The action that commands trigger can be context sensitive, so that they can only be called under certain conditions (window focus, current selection etc.).

Reviewer: minor: we've never referred to the `command palette` or `quick commands menu` as the `quick access bar`, perhaps we should be consistent:

- https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette

Author: fixed

A command is an object with an `id` and an optional, potentially user visible `label` (see HelloworldCommand in the example below). The command contribution receives the `CommandRegistry` in the `registerCommands` function as a parameter. The command can then be registered by calling `registerCommand` on this registry. Along with the command a callback needs to be provided which is executed whenever the command is triggered (`CommandHandler`). In the example, the command uses the MessageService to “say hello”. 

**helloworld-contribution.ts**
```typescript
export const HelloworldCommand: Command = {
   id: 'Helloworld.command',
   label: "Say Hello"
};
 
@injectable()
export class HelloworldCommandContribution implements CommandContribution {
 
   constructor(
       @inject(MessageService) private readonly messageService: MessageService,
   ) { }
 
   registerCommands(registry: CommandRegistry): void {
       registry.registerCommand(HelloworldCommand, {
           execute: () => this.messageService.info('Hello World!')
       });
   }
}

```

> To make the command execution context sensitive, the `CommandHandler` can optionally implement `isEnabled` and `isVisible`. When a command is executed, the command registry check all registered handlers. The first handler that returns true on `isEnabled` will be considered to be active and it will be executed. Only one handler should be active (`isEnabled === true`) at the same time, though. `isVisible` controls the visibility of menu items that are connected to a command, if the active handler returns true, the menu item will be visible and vice versa.

Reviewer: > when a command is executed, the command registry check all registered handlers.

Do you mind sharing an example of this (not in the docs but just as a conversation)? As far as I am aware you can only register a command once, so I'm not sure what we mean by checking all registered handlers.

Reviewer: I believe I understand a bit more what you mean, you're not referring to how commands are generally registered, but rather the `registerHandler` method.

Author: Tried to clarify this

> To make the command execution context sensitive, the `CommandHandler` can optionally implement `isEnabled` and `isVisible`. When a command is executed, the command registry check all registered handlers. The first handler that returns true on `isEnabled` will be considered to be active and it will be executed. Only one handler should be active (`isEnabled === true`) at the same time, though. `isVisible` controls the visibility of menu items that are connected to a command, if the active handler returns true, the menu item will be visible and vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the command execution context sensitive, the `CommandHandler` can optionally implement `isEnabled` and `isVisible`. When a command is executed, the command registry checks all registered handlers. The first handler that returns true on `isEnabled` will be considered to be active and it will be executed. Only one handler should be active (`isEnabled === true`) at the same time, though. `isVisible` controls the visibility of menu items that are connected to a command, if the active handler returns true, the menu item will be visible and vice versa.
```

> To make the command execution context sensitive, the `CommandHandler` can optionally implement `isEnabled` and `isVisible`. When a command is executed, the command registry check all registered handlers. The first handler that returns true on `isEnabled` will be considered to be active and it will be executed. Only one handler should be active (`isEnabled === true`) at the same time, though. `isVisible` controls the visibility of menu items that are connected to a command, if the active handler returns true, the menu item will be visible and vice versa.

Reviewer: > `isVisible` controls the visibility of menu items that are connected to a command

`isVisible` will also control the visibility of toolbar items, and commands in the command palette, not only standard menu items.

Author: added, good catch

> ---

Reviewer: Should the file be renamed for clarity with `menus` in it?

Reviewer: Perhaps this one is not worth it, It'll break anyone that refers to the old link.

Author: Yes, i did not rename this on purpose

title: Commands/Menus/Keybindings
---

# Commands, Menus and Keybindings

> Commands are runnable actions defined by an ID and the function to be executed (plus some optional parameters like a name or an icon). Commands can be triggered via the command pallete, they can be bound to keybindings or menu items and they can be called programmatically. The action that commands trigger can be context sensitive, so that they can only be called under certain conditions (window focus, current selection etc.).

Reviewer: typo:

`pallete` > `palette`

The following sections provide details about how to contribute commands, keybindings and menu items. The sections will describe how to connect the different contributions and how to use the corresponding services for managing these items.

If you are not yet familiar with contribution points in Theia or the use of dependency injection, please consider this guide on [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

> All the following code examples are from the [Theia extension generator](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/generator-theia-extension). You can get the same code set-up by installing the generator, selecting the “Hello World” example (see here) and choosing “helloworld” as the name. 

Reviewer: @JonasHelming the following is an introduction on `commands`, `menus` and `keybindings` but only describes `commands`. We should either describe each contribution type briefly, or move the information specific to commands in the `contributing commands` section:

> Commands are runnable actions defined by an ID and the function to be executed (plus some optional parameters like a name or an icon). Commands can be triggered via the command palette, they can be bound to keybindings or menu items and they can be called programmatically. The action that commands trigger can be context sensitive, so that they can only be called under certain conditions (window focus, current selection etc.).

Author: Sorry, I do not get this comment. It describes that "Commands can be triggered via the command palette, they can be bound to **keybindings** or **menu items**.
And then: "The following sections provide details about how to contribute commands, keybindings and menu items"
I think the command needs one sentence more, because it is the central concept but also not self-explanatory. If you know what a command is, I think you can understand what a menu item is that triggers this command.

Reviewer: @JonasHelming we are targeting mainly newcomers to the project with the docs, I  was just thinking we should be as thorough as possible. At the moment we only describe commands at a high-level and not menus or keybindings.

In addition, not all menu items have commands (submenus, top-level menus), and keybindings can be expanded upon as well to refer to contexts or when clauses (these aren't trivial to newcomers).

Reviewer: We can improve the docs in the future to cover additional use-cases that I mentioned, I just found it odd we described one of the contributions but not the others.

Author: > @JonasHelming we are targeting mainly newcomers to the project with the docs, I was just thinking we should be as thorough as possible. At the moment we only describe commands at a high-level and not menus or keybindings.

Yes, we are targeting newcomers. I think it is very important to not overload them with information in the intro. If you have to understand 10 things in one paragraph, I do not believe it is a good start. 
However, I gave it a try, but tbh, it is just weird:
 "A keybinding is a key combination triggering  a command"
 "A menu item is an item shown in a menu which can trigger a command". 
I think that just adds obvious information and makes the intro unnecessarily long.
Again, we do mention the concepts, I just think everybody knows what they mean. I believe I was never asked in a training what a menu item or a keybinding is, but I was asked what a command is.
Maybe it helps if we make the three concepts bold in the text?
I am sorry, but otherwise I am not really sure to address your comment, my attempts do not improve the doc for my PoV.  If you have a good suggestion on how to achieve what you want to say, please feel free to make a suggestion.

> 
> In addition, not all menu items have commands (submenus, top-level menus), and keybindings can be expanded upon as well to refer to contexts or when clauses (these aren't trivial to newcomers).

Keybinding contexts are deprecated. The when clause is described below, I do not think it should be mentioned in the intro, though. The hint on how to create sub menues and top level menus was indeed missing, good catch! I added that.

> ## Contributing commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Contributing Commands
```

> By contributing a command, you can add a custom action to Theia. A command can be triggered by the user via the quick access bar, a keybinding or a menu entry. It can also be called programmatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By contributing a command, you can add a custom action to Theia. A command can be triggered by the user via the command palette, a keybinding or a menu entry. It can also be called programmatically.
```

In the following sections, we describe how to bind commands to menu items and keybindings.

## Contributing Menu Items

Theia allows you to contribute menu items that will be displayed in specific menus within your Theia application. Menu items are bound to commands and therefore allow the user to trigger actions (please see the section about commands above).

All the following code examples are from the [Theia extension generator](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/generator-theia-extension). You can get the same code set-up by installing the generator, selecting the “Hello World” example (see [here](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/generator-theia-extension)) and choosing “helloworld” as the name.

All menu items of a Theia application are managed in the `MenuModelRegistry`. To contribute menu items to the registry, modules must implement the ´MenuContribution´ interface (see code example below). 

> The registration of the command can be done in the function `registerMenus`, which will be called by the Theia framework. The function provides the `MenuModelRegistry` as a parameter. On this registry we can call `registerMenuAction`. It expects a `MenuPath` and a `MenuAction`. The `MenuPath` specifies the menu (and submenu) to place the menu item into. Please see [here for the paths of some common menus](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/blob/f776392b6b616af48d222fbeb035e08c2c1f2865/packages/core/src/browser/common-frontend-contribution.ts#L59-L85).

Reviewer: > Please see [here for the paths of some common menus](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/blob/f776392b6b616af48d222fbeb035e08c2c1f2865/packages/core/src/browser/common-frontend-contribution.ts#L59-L85).

We can also use refer to the TypeDoc directly instead:
- https://eclipse-theia.github.io/theia/docs/next/modules/core.commonmenus-1.html

 
   registerMenus(menus: MenuModelRegistry): void {
       menus.registerMenuAction(CommonMenus.EDIT_FIND, {
           commandId: HelloworldCommand.id,
           label: HelloworldCommand.label
       });
   }
}
```

To make our `MenuContribution` accessible to Theia, we need to bind the custom `HelloWorldMenuContribution` to the respective contribution symbol `MenuContribution`. This is done in the `helloworld-frontend-module`, for more details see [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

**helloworld-contribution.ts**
```typescript
export default new ContainerModule(bind => {
   bind(MenuContribution).to(HelloworldMenuContribution);
      ...
});

```

## Contributing Keybindings

Keybindings allow the user to trigger commands using specific key combinations. Keybindings can define conditions, specifying when they are active. As an example, there can be keybindings that are only active when the text editor is focused.

Please note that the following code examples are not part of the generated template, so you will need to manually add them (see previous sections).

> To contribute a keybinding, implement a ´KeybindingContribution´ (see code example below) with which you can access the `KeybindingRegistry`, allowing you to register a keybinding. Keybindings consist of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To contribute a keybinding, implement a `KeybindingContribution` (see code example below) with which you can access the `KeybindingRegistry`, allowing you to register a keybinding. Keybindings consist of:
```

The `MenuAction` consists of a command id, specifying which command to trigger, and an optional label, specifying the label of the menu item.

**helloworld-contribution.ts**
```typescript
@injectable()
export class HelloworldMenuContribution implements MenuContribution {
 
   registerMenus(menus: MenuModelRegistry): void {
       menus.registerMenuAction(CommonMenus.EDIT_FIND, {
           commandId: HelloworldCommand.id,
           label: HelloworldCommand.label
       });
   }
}
```

To make our `MenuContribution` accessible to Theia, we need to bind the custom `HelloWorldMenuContribution` to the respective contribution symbol `MenuContribution`. This is done in the `helloworld-frontend-module`, for more details see [Services and Contributions](https://theia-ide.org/docs/services_and_contributions/).

**helloworld-contribution.ts**
```typescript
export default new ContainerModule(bind => {
   bind(MenuContribution).to(HelloworldMenuContribution);
      ...
});

```

> Please note that you also contribute menu items without a command which allows you to create custom top level menus and sub menus. To achive this, contribute a menu item without a command and then reference the id of this menu item as a `MenuPath` in other contributes. This will add menu items to your custom menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that you also contribute menu items without a command which allows you to create custom top level menus and sub menus. To achieve this, contribute a menu item without a command and then reference the id of this menu item as a `MenuPath` in other contributes. This will add menu items to your custom menu.
```

## Contributing Keybindings

Keybindings allow the user to trigger commands using specific key combinations. Keybindings can define conditions, specifying when they are active. As an example, there can be keybindings that are only active when the text editor is focused.

Please note that the following code examples are not part of the generated template, so you will need to manually add them (see previous sections).

To contribute a keybinding, implement a `KeybindingContribution` (see code example below) with which you can access the `KeybindingRegistry`, allowing you to register a keybinding. Keybindings consist of:

* `keybinding`: The key combination
* `command`: The id of the command to be triggered
* `when`(optional): The condition when the keybinding should be active

**helloworld-keybinding-contribution.ts**
```typescript
export class HelloworldKeybindingContribution implements KeybindingContribution {
    registerKeybindings(keybindings: KeybindingRegistry): void {
        keybindings.registerKeybinding({
            keybinding: "alt+enter",
            command: 'Helloworld.command',
            when: 'editorFocus && editorIsOpen'
        });
    }
}
```

> The syntax for the “when” clause follows the [VS Code terminology](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/keybindings#_when-clause-contexts). Modifiers are platform independent, so `Modifier.M1` is Command on OS X and CTRL on Windows/Linux. Key string constants are defined in [keys.ts](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/blob/master/packages/core/src/browser/keyboard/keys.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syntax for the “when” clause follows the [VS Code terminology](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/keybindings#_when-clause-contexts). Modifiers are platform independent, so [`Modifier.M1`](https://eclipse-theia.github.io/theia/docs/next/enums/core.keymodifier-2.html#ctrlcmd) is Command on OS X and CTRL on Windows/Linux. Key string constants can be viewed in [`Key` documentation](https://eclipse-theia.github.io/theia/docs/next/modules/core.key-2.html).
```

}

```

> To make the command execution context sensitive, the `CommandHandler` can optionally implement `isEnabled` and `isVisible`. Theia will execute the active handler that returns true on `isEnabled`, so there should be only one active handler doing so. `isVisible` controls the visibility of menu items that are connected to a command, if the active handler returns true, the menu item will be visible and vice versa.

Reviewer: Include a newline just to more easily separate content.

Author: done

> To make the command execution context sensitive, the `CommandHandler` can optionally implement `isEnabled` and `isVisible`. Theia will execute the active handler that returns true on `isEnabled`, so there should be only one active handler doing so. `isVisible` controls the visibility of menu items that are connected to a command, if the active handler returns true, the menu item will be visible and vice versa.

Reviewer: > Theia will execute the active handler that returns true on `isEnabled`, so there should be only one active handler doing so.

I'm not sure what we are referring to here, can you elaborate, or share what you are trying to express?

Author: I tried to make it more clear

> Finally, `isToggle` can optionally specific, whether menu items connected to the commands should be toggled on or off.

Reviewer: Not sure what we mean here by:

> optional specific

Perhaps `optionally specified`?

Author: fixed
